README.md, before:

# claude-code.el

An Emacs interface for [Claude Code CLI](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code), providing integration between Emacs and Claude AI for coding assistance.

## Features

- Start, stop, and toggle Claude Code sessions directly from Emacs
- Support for multiple Claude instances across different projects and directories
- Send commands to Claude with or without file/line context
- Quick access to all Claude slash commands via transient menus
- Customizable key bindings and appearance settings

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Emacs 30.0 or higher
- [Claude Code CLI](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code) installed and configured
- Required Emacs packages: transient (0.4.0+), eat (0.9.2+)

### Using builtin use-package (Emacs 30+)

```elisp
(use-package claude-code :ensure t
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/stevemolitor/claude-code.el" :rev :newest)
  :config (claude-code-mode)
  :bind-keymap ("C-c c" . claude-code-command-map)) ;; or your preferred key
```

### Using straight.el

```elisp
(use-package claude-code
  :straight (:type git :host github :repo "stevemolitor/claude-code.el" :branch "main"
                   :files ("*.el" (:exclude "demo.gif")))
  :bind-keymap
  ("C-c c" . claude-code-command-map)
  :config
  (claude-code-mode))
```

## Usage

You need to set your own key binding for the Claude Code command map. The examples in this README use `C-c c` as the prefix key.

### Basic Commands

- `claude-code` (`C-c c c`) - Start Claude. With prefix arg (`C-u`), switches to the Claude buffer after creating. With double prefix (`C-u C-u`), continues previous conversation. With triple prefix (`C-u C-u C-u`), prompts for the project directory
- `claude-code-toggle` (`C-c c t`) - Toggle Claude window
- `claude-code-switch-to-buffer` (`C-c c b`) - Switch to the Claude buffer. With prefix arg (`C-u`), shows all Claude instances across all directories
- `claude-code-kill` (`C-c c k`) - Kill Claude session. With prefix arg (`C-u`), kills ALL Claude instances across all directories
- `claude-code-send-command` (`C-c c s`) - Send command to Claude
- `claude-code-send-command-with-context` (`C-c c x`) - Send command with current file and line context
- `claude-code-send-region` (`C-c c r`) - Send the current region or buffer to Claude. With prefix arg (`C-u`), prompts for instructions to add to the text. With double prefix (`C-u C-u`), adds instructions and switches to Claude buffer
- `claude-code-fix-error-at-point` (`C-c c e`) - Ask Claude to fix the error at the current point (works with flycheck, flymake, and any system that implements help-at-pt)
- `claude-code-slash-commands` (`C-c c /`) - Access Claude slash commands menu
- `claude-code-transient` (`C-c c m`) - Show all commands (transient menu)
- `claude-code-send-return` (`C-c c y`) - Send return key to Claude (useful for confirming with Claude without switching to the Claude REPL buffer)
- `claude-code-send-escape` (`C-c c n`) - Send escape key to Claude (useful for saying "No" when Claude asks for confirmation without switching to the Claude REPL buffer)
- `claude-code-fork` (`C-c c f`) - Fork conversation (jump to previous conversation by sending escape-escape to Claude)
- `claude-code-send-1` (`C-c c 1`) - Send "1" to Claude (useful for selecting the first option when Claude presents a numbered menu)
- `claude-code-send-2` (`C-c c 2`) - Send "2" to Claude (useful for selecting the second option when Claude presents a numbered menu)
- `claude-code-send-3` (`C-c c 3`) - Send "3" to Claude (useful for selecting the third option when Claude presents a numbered menu)
- `claude-code-cycle-mode` (`C-c c TAB`) - Send Shift-Tab to Claude to cycle between default mode, auto-accept edits mode, and plan mode

With a single prefix arg, `claude-code`, `claude-code-send-command` and
`claude-code-send-command-with-context` will switch to the Claude terminal buffer after sending the
command.



### Read-Only Mode Toggle

The `claude-code-toggle-read-only-mode` command provides a convenient way to switch between normal terminal mode and read-only mode in the Claude buffer:

- `claude-code-toggle-read-only-mode` - Toggle between read-only mode and normal mode

In read-only mode, you can interact with the terminal buffer just like a regular Emacs buffer, making it easy to select and copy text. However, you cannot change the buffer contents or enter Claude commands in this mode. This is particularly useful when you need to copy output from Claude without accidentally modifying the terminal.

The command automatically detects the current mode and switches to the other:
- If in normal terminal mode (semi-char mode), it switches to read-only mode
- If in read-only mode (emacs mode), it switches back to normal terminal mode

### Continuing Previous Conversations

The `claude-code` command supports continuing previous conversations using Claude's `--continue`
flag:

- Double prefix arg (`C-u C-u C-c c c`) - Start Claude and continue previous conversation

This allows you to resume where you left off in your previous Claude session.

### Transient Menus

Access all commands through the transient menu with `C-c c m`.

#### Slash Commands Menu

For quick access to Claude slash commands like `/help`, `/clear`, or `/compact`, use `C-c c /` to open the slash commands menu.

### Read-Only Mode for Text Selection

In the Claude terminal, you can switch to a read-only mode to select and copy text:

- `C-c C-e` (`eat-emacs-mode`) - Switch to read-only mode with normal Emacs cursor for text selection
- `C-c C-j` (`semi-char-mode`) - Return to normal terminal mode

The cursor appearance in read-only mode can be customized via the `claude-code-read-only-mode-cursor-type` variable. This variable uses the format `(CURSOR-ON BLINKING-FREQUENCY CURSOR-OFF)`. For more information, run `M-x describe-variable RET claude-code-read-only-mode-cursor-type RET`.

```elisp
;; Customize cursor type in read-only mode (default is '(box nil nil))
;; Cursor type options: 'box, 'hollow, 'bar, 'hbar, or nil
(setq claude-code-read-only-mode-cursor-type '(bar nil nil))
```

### Multiple Claude Instances

`claude-code.el` supports running multiple Claude instances across different projects and directories. Each Claude instance is associated with a specific directory (project root, file directory, or current directory).

#### Instance Management

- When you start Claude with `claude-code`, it creates an instance for the current directory
- If a Claude instance already exists for the directory, you'll be prompted to name the new instance (e.g., "tests", "docs")
- Buffer names follow the format:
  - `*claude:/path/to/directory*` for the default instance
  - `*claude:/path/to/directory:instance-name*` for named instances (e.g., `*claude:/home/user/project:tests*`)
- If you're in a directory without a Claude instance but have instances running in other directories, you'll be prompted to select one
- Your selection is remembered for that directory, so you won't be prompted again
- To start a new instance instead of selecting an existing one, cancel the prompt with `C-g`

#### Instance Selection

Commands that operate on an instance (`claude-send-command`, `claude-code-switch-to-buffer`, `claude-code-kill`, etc.) will prompt you for the Claude instance if there is more than one instance associated with the current buffer's project.

If the buffer file is not associated with a running Claude instance, you can select an instance running in a different project. This is useful when you want Claude to analyze dependent projects or files that you have checked out in sibling directories.

Claude-code.el remembers which buffers are associated with which Claude instances, so you won't be repeatedly prompted. This association also helps claude-code.el "do the right thing" when killing a Claude process and deleting its associated buffer.

#### Multiple Instances Per Directory

You can run multiple Claude instances for the same directory to support different workflows:

- The first instance in a directory is the "default" instance
- Additional instances require a name when created (e.g., "tests", "docs", "refactor")
- When multiple instances exist for a directory, commands that interact with Claude will prompt you to select which instance to use
- Use `C-u claude-code-switch-to-buffer` to see all Claude instances across all directories (not just the current directory)

This allows you to have separate Claude conversations for different aspects of your work within the same project, such as one instance for writing code and another for writing tests.

## Customization

```elisp
;; Set your key binding for the command map
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c C-a") claude-code-command-map)

;; Set terminal type for the Claude terminal emulation (default is "xterm-256color")
;; This determines terminal capabilities like color support
;; See the documentation for eat-term-name for more information
(setq claude-code-term-name "xterm-256color")

;; Change the path to the Claude executable (default is "claude")
;; Useful if Claude is not in your PATH or you want to use a specific version
(setq claude-code-program "/usr/local/bin/claude")

;; Set command line arguments for Claude
;; For example, to enable verbose output
(setq claude-code-program-switches '("--verbose"))

;; Add hooks to run after Claude is started
(add-hook 'claude-code-start-hook 'my-claude-setup-function)

;; Adjust initialization delay (default is 0.1 seconds)
;; This helps prevent terminal layout issues if the buffer is displayed before Claude is fully ready
(setq claude-code-startup-delay 0.2)

;; Configure the buffer size threshold for confirmation prompt (default is 100000 characters)
;; If a buffer is larger than this threshold, claude-code-send-region will ask for confirmation
;; before sending the entire buffer to Claude
(setq claude-code-large-buffer-threshold 100000)

;; Disable truncation of Claude output buffer (default is nil)
;; When set to t, claude-code.el can output display content without truncation
;; This is useful when working with large Claude buffers
(setq claude-code-never-truncate-claude-buffer t)
```

### Customizing Window Position

You can control how the Claude Code window appears using Emacs' `display-buffer-alist`. For example, to make the Claude window appear in a persistent side window on the right side of your screen with 33% width:

```elisp
(add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist
                 `("^\\*claude"
                   (display-buffer-in-side-window)
                   (side . right)
                   (window-width . ,width)
                   (window-parameters . ((no-delete-other-windows . t)))))
```

This layout works best on wide screens.

### Font Configuration for Better Rendering

Using a font with good Unicode support helps avoid flickering while Claude Code is rendering its thinking icons. [JuliaMono](https://juliamono.netlify.app/) has excellent Unicode symbols support. To let the Claude Code buffer use Julia Mono for rendering Unicode characters while still using your default font for ASCII characters add this elisp code:

```elisp
(setq use-default-font-for-symbols nil)
(set-fontset-font t 'unicode (font-spec :family "JuliaMono"))
```

If instead you want to use a particular font just for the Claude Code REPL but use a different font
everywhere else you can customize the `claude-code-repl-face`:

```elisp
(custom-set-faces
   '(claude-code-repl-face ((t (:family "JuliaMono")))))
```

#### Using Your 

### Reducing Flickering on Window Configuration Changes

To reduce flickering in the Claude buffer on window configuration changes, you can adjust eat latency variables in a hook. This reduces flickering at the cost of some increased latency:

```elisp
  ;; reduce flickering
  (add-hook 'claude-code-start-hook
            (lambda ()
              (setq-local eat-minimum-latency 0.033
                          eat-maximum-latency 0.1)))
```

_Note_: Recent changes to claude-code.el have fixed flickering issues, making customization of these latency values less necessary. 

## Demo

### GIF Demo

![Claude Code Emacs Demo](./demo.gif)

This [demo](./demo.gif) shows claude-code.el in action, including accessing the transient menu, sending commands with file context, and fixing errors.

### Video Demo

[![The Emacs Claude Code Package](https://img.youtube.com/vi/K8sCVLmFyyU/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8sCVLmFyyU)

Check out this [video demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8sCVLmFyyU) demonstrating the claude-code.el package. This video was kindly created and shared by a user of the package.

## Limitations

- `claude-code.el` only supports using [eat](https://codeberg.org/akib/emacs-eat) for the Claude Code terminal window. Eat provides better rendering with less flickering and visual artifacts compared to other terminal emulators like ansi-term and vterm in testing.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0 - see the LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Add thinking budget feature for Claude commands
This implements issue #17 - adds support for thinking effort keywords
that allocate more computational time for Claude's problem-solving.

Features:
- New customizable variable `claude-code-thinking-levels` with default
  levels: "think", "think hard", "think harder", "ultrathink"
- Transient menu accessible via C-c c T for quick thinking prefix access
- Commands send prefixes like [Think], [Think Hard], [Think Harder],
  [Ultrathink] and let users type their command
- Added claude-code--do-send-string helper to send text without newline

The implementation follows Anthropic's best practices for using thinking
effort keywords to improve Claude's problem-solving capabilities on
complex tasks.

README.md, after:

# claude-code.el

An Emacs interface for [Claude Code CLI](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code), providing integration between Emacs and Claude AI for coding assistance.

## Features

- Start, stop, and toggle Claude Code sessions directly from Emacs
- Support for multiple Claude instances across different projects and directories
- Send commands to Claude with or without file/line context
- Quick access to all Claude slash commands via transient menus
- Customizable key bindings and appearance settings

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Emacs 30.0 or higher
- [Claude Code CLI](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code) installed and configured
- Required Emacs packages: transient (0.4.0+), eat (0.9.2+)

### Using builtin use-package (Emacs 30+)

```elisp
(use-package claude-code :ensure t
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/stevemolitor/claude-code.el" :rev :newest)
  :config (claude-code-mode)
  :bind-keymap ("C-c c" . claude-code-command-map)) ;; or your preferred key
```

### Using straight.el

```elisp
(use-package claude-code
  :straight (:type git :host github :repo "stevemolitor/claude-code.el" :branch "main"
                   :files ("*.el" (:exclude "demo.gif")))
  :bind-keymap
  ("C-c c" . claude-code-command-map)
  :config
  (claude-code-mode))
```

## Usage

You need to set your own key binding for the Claude Code command map. The examples in this README use `C-c c` as the prefix key.

### Basic Commands

- `claude-code` (`C-c c c`) - Start Claude. With prefix arg (`C-u`), switches to the Claude buffer after creating. With double prefix (`C-u C-u`), continues previous conversation. With triple prefix (`C-u C-u C-u`), prompts for the project directory
- `claude-code-toggle` (`C-c c t`) - Toggle Claude window
- `claude-code-switch-to-buffer` (`C-c c b`) - Switch to the Claude buffer. With prefix arg (`C-u`), shows all Claude instances across all directories
- `claude-code-kill` (`C-c c k`) - Kill Claude session. With prefix arg (`C-u`), kills ALL Claude instances across all directories
- `claude-code-send-command` (`C-c c s`) - Send command to Claude
- `claude-code-send-command-with-context` (`C-c c x`) - Send command with current file and line context
- `claude-code-send-region` (`C-c c r`) - Send the current region or buffer to Claude. With prefix arg (`C-u`), prompts for instructions to add to the text. With double prefix (`C-u C-u`), adds instructions and switches to Claude buffer
- `claude-code-fix-error-at-point` (`C-c c e`) - Ask Claude to fix the error at the current point (works with flycheck, flymake, and any system that implements help-at-pt)
- `claude-code-slash-commands` (`C-c c /`) - Access Claude slash commands menu
- `claude-code-transient` (`C-c c m`) - Show all commands (transient menu)
- `claude-code-send-return` (`C-c c y`) - Send return key to Claude (useful for confirming with Claude without switching to the Claude REPL buffer)
- `claude-code-send-escape` (`C-c c n`) - Send escape key to Claude (useful for saying "No" when Claude asks for confirmation without switching to the Claude REPL buffer)
- `claude-code-fork` (`C-c c f`) - Fork conversation (jump to previous conversation by sending escape-escape to Claude)
- `claude-code-send-1` (`C-c c 1`) - Send "1" to Claude (useful for selecting the first option when Claude presents a numbered menu)
- `claude-code-send-2` (`C-c c 2`) - Send "2" to Claude (useful for selecting the second option when Claude presents a numbered menu)
- `claude-code-send-3` (`C-c c 3`) - Send "3" to Claude (useful for selecting the third option when Claude presents a numbered menu)
- `claude-code-cycle-mode` (`C-c c TAB`) - Send Shift-Tab to Claude to cycle between default mode, auto-accept edits mode, and plan mode
- `claude-code-thinking-menu` (`C-c c T`) - Access thinking effort commands menu

With a single prefix arg, `claude-code`, `claude-code-send-command` and
`claude-code-send-command-with-context` will switch to the Claude terminal buffer after sending the
command.



### Read-Only Mode Toggle

The `claude-code-toggle-read-only-mode` command provides a convenient way to switch between normal terminal mode and read-only mode in the Claude buffer:

- `claude-code-toggle-read-only-mode` - Toggle between read-only mode and normal mode

In read-only mode, you can interact with the terminal buffer just like a regular Emacs buffer, making it easy to select and copy text. However, you cannot change the buffer contents or enter Claude commands in this mode. This is particularly useful when you need to copy output from Claude without accidentally modifying the terminal.

The command automatically detects the current mode and switches to the other:
- If in normal terminal mode (semi-char mode), it switches to read-only mode
- If in read-only mode (emacs mode), it switches back to normal terminal mode

### Continuing Previous Conversations

The `claude-code` command supports continuing previous conversations using Claude's `--continue`
flag:

- Double prefix arg (`C-u C-u C-c c c`) - Start Claude and continue previous conversation

This allows you to resume where you left off in your previous Claude session.

### Transient Menus

Access all commands through the transient menu with `C-c c m`.

#### Slash Commands Menu

For quick access to Claude slash commands like `/help`, `/clear`, or `/compact`, use `C-c c /` to open the slash commands menu.

#### Thinking Budget Commands

Claude supports "thinking effort" keywords that allocate more computational time for problem-solving. The thinking menu (`C-c c T`) provides quick access to send thinking prefixes to Claude:

- Level 1: `[Think]` - Basic thinking effort
- Level 2: `[Think Hard]` - Increased thinking effort  
- Level 3: `[Think Harder]` - More thinking effort
- Level 4: `[Ultrathink]` - Maximum thinking effort

When you select a thinking level, it sends the prefix (e.g., `[Ultrathink] `) to Claude and positions the cursor for you to type your command. After typing your command, press Enter to submit it.

For example, selecting level 4 sends `[Ultrathink] ` to the Claude buffer, then you type: `explain this code` and press Enter.

The thinking keywords are customizable via `claude-code-thinking-levels`.

### Read-Only Mode for Text Selection

In the Claude terminal, you can switch to a read-only mode to select and copy text:

- `C-c C-e` (`eat-emacs-mode`) - Switch to read-only mode with normal Emacs cursor for text selection
- `C-c C-j` (`semi-char-mode`) - Return to normal terminal mode

The cursor appearance in read-only mode can be customized via the `claude-code-read-only-mode-cursor-type` variable. This variable uses the format `(CURSOR-ON BLINKING-FREQUENCY CURSOR-OFF)`. For more information, run `M-x describe-variable RET claude-code-read-only-mode-cursor-type RET`.

```elisp
;; Customize cursor type in read-only mode (default is '(box nil nil))
;; Cursor type options: 'box, 'hollow, 'bar, 'hbar, or nil
(setq claude-code-read-only-mode-cursor-type '(bar nil nil))
```

### Multiple Claude Instances

`claude-code.el` supports running multiple Claude instances across different projects and directories. Each Claude instance is associated with a specific directory (project root, file directory, or current directory).

#### Instance Management

- When you start Claude with `claude-code`, it creates an instance for the current directory
- If a Claude instance already exists for the directory, you'll be prompted to name the new instance (e.g., "tests", "docs")
- Buffer names follow the format:
  - `*claude:/path/to/directory*` for the default instance
  - `*claude:/path/to/directory:instance-name*` for named instances (e.g., `*claude:/home/user/project:tests*`)
- If you're in a directory without a Claude instance but have instances running in other directories, you'll be prompted to select one
- Your selection is remembered for that directory, so you won't be prompted again
- To start a new instance instead of selecting an existing one, cancel the prompt with `C-g`

#### Instance Selection

Commands that operate on an instance (`claude-send-command`, `claude-code-switch-to-buffer`, `claude-code-kill`, etc.) will prompt you for the Claude instance if there is more than one instance associated with the current buffer's project.

If the buffer file is not associated with a running Claude instance, you can select an instance running in a different project. This is useful when you want Claude to analyze dependent projects or files that you have checked out in sibling directories.

Claude-code.el remembers which buffers are associated with which Claude instances, so you won't be repeatedly prompted. This association also helps claude-code.el "do the right thing" when killing a Claude process and deleting its associated buffer.

#### Multiple Instances Per Directory

You can run multiple Claude instances for the same directory to support different workflows:

- The first instance in a directory is the "default" instance
- Additional instances require a name when created (e.g., "tests", "docs", "refactor")
- When multiple instances exist for a directory, commands that interact with Claude will prompt you to select which instance to use
- Use `C-u claude-code-switch-to-buffer` to see all Claude instances across all directories (not just the current directory)

This allows you to have separate Claude conversations for different aspects of your work within the same project, such as one instance for writing code and another for writing tests.

## Customization

```elisp
;; Set your key binding for the command map
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c C-a") claude-code-command-map)

;; Set terminal type for the Claude terminal emulation (default is "xterm-256color")
;; This determines terminal capabilities like color support
;; See the documentation for eat-term-name for more information
(setq claude-code-term-name "xterm-256color")

;; Change the path to the Claude executable (default is "claude")
;; Useful if Claude is not in your PATH or you want to use a specific version
(setq claude-code-program "/usr/local/bin/claude")

;; Set command line arguments for Claude
;; For example, to enable verbose output
(setq claude-code-program-switches '("--verbose"))

;; Add hooks to run after Claude is started
(add-hook 'claude-code-start-hook 'my-claude-setup-function)

;; Adjust initialization delay (default is 0.1 seconds)
;; This helps prevent terminal layout issues if the buffer is displayed before Claude is fully ready
(setq claude-code-startup-delay 0.2)

;; Configure the buffer size threshold for confirmation prompt (default is 100000 characters)
;; If a buffer is larger than this threshold, claude-code-send-region will ask for confirmation
;; before sending the entire buffer to Claude
(setq claude-code-large-buffer-threshold 100000)

;; Disable truncation of Claude output buffer (default is nil)
;; When set to t, claude-code.el can output display content without truncation
;; This is useful when working with large Claude buffers
(setq claude-code-never-truncate-claude-buffer t)
```

### Customizing Window Position

You can control how the Claude Code window appears using Emacs' `display-buffer-alist`. For example, to make the Claude window appear in a persistent side window on the right side of your screen with 33% width:

```elisp
(add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist
                 `("^\\*claude"
                   (display-buffer-in-side-window)
                   (side . right)
                   (window-width . ,width)
                   (window-parameters . ((no-delete-other-windows . t)))))
```

This layout works best on wide screens.

### Font Configuration for Better Rendering

Using a font with good Unicode support helps avoid flickering while Claude Code is rendering its thinking icons. [JuliaMono](https://juliamono.netlify.app/) has excellent Unicode symbols support. To let the Claude Code buffer use Julia Mono for rendering Unicode characters while still using your default font for ASCII characters add this elisp code:

```elisp
(setq use-default-font-for-symbols nil)
(set-fontset-font t 'unicode (font-spec :family "JuliaMono"))
```

If instead you want to use a particular font just for the Claude Code REPL but use a different font
everywhere else you can customize the `claude-code-repl-face`:

```elisp
(custom-set-faces
   '(claude-code-repl-face ((t (:family "JuliaMono")))))
```

#### Using Your 

### Reducing Flickering on Window Configuration Changes

To reduce flickering in the Claude buffer on window configuration changes, you can adjust eat latency variables in a hook. This reduces flickering at the cost of some increased latency:

```elisp
  ;; reduce flickering
  (add-hook 'claude-code-start-hook
            (lambda ()
              (setq-local eat-minimum-latency 0.033
                          eat-maximum-latency 0.1)))
```

_Note_: Recent changes to claude-code.el have fixed flickering issues, making customization of these latency values less necessary. 

## Demo

### GIF Demo

![Claude Code Emacs Demo](./demo.gif)

This [demo](./demo.gif) shows claude-code.el in action, including accessing the transient menu, sending commands with file context, and fixing errors.

### Video Demo

[![The Emacs Claude Code Package](https://img.youtube.com/vi/K8sCVLmFyyU/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8sCVLmFyyU)

Check out this [video demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8sCVLmFyyU) demonstrating the claude-code.el package. This video was kindly created and shared by a user of the package.

## Limitations

- `claude-code.el` only supports using [eat](https://codeberg.org/akib/emacs-eat) for the Claude Code terminal window. Eat provides better rendering with less flickering and visual artifacts compared to other terminal emulators like ansi-term and vterm in testing.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0 - see the LICENSE file for details.
